JAKARTA: An historic rise in commodity prices and reopening of the economy from COVID-19 curbs helped Indonesia stay on a recovery path in the first quarter, but analysts say headwinds are growing from global monetary tightening and the war in Ukraine.

Southeast Asia's largest economy grew 5.01% in January-March from a year earlier, a fourth straight quarter of expansion. That compared to 5.00% forecast by analysts in a Reuters poll and 5.02% growth in the October-December quarter.

A recovery in consumption, investment and exports underpinned growth while surging prices of global commodities such as coal, palm oil and nickel, also contributed to record high trade surpluses for Indonesia, a major supplier of these resources. Indonesia posted $9.33 billion trade surplus in the first quarter.

COVID-19 restrictions imposed earlier in the year, which have now been lifted, led to a strong pick-up in economic activities and spending, including travel, Margo Yuwono, head of Indonesia's statistics bureau, told a news conference.

Consumption, which accounts for more than half of GDP, grew 4.34% in the first quarter, up from 3.55% in the fourth quarter.

Improved activity also led to a lower unemployment rate of 5.83% by February 2022, data showed, compared with 6.26% a year earlier. The rate was, however, still higher than the pre-pandemic level of 4.94%.

On a quarterly basis, however, economists highlighted that growth momentum had slowed and cited geopolitical concerns among other factors that could hamper growth.

"Several global risks that will affect the national economic recovery include geopolitical risks, China's economic slowdown and rising global inflation that has prompted tightening of global monetary policy," Josua Pardede, an economist at Bank Permata, said.

Bank Indonesia (BI), which has pledged to keep interest rates at record lows until it sees signs of pressure on core inflation, intends to review its plans to normalise monetary policy in May to June, and assess any risks to the inflation outlook if the government changes energy prices and subsidies.

It had previously said interest rate levels would only be reviewed in the third quarter.

Faisal Rachman, Bank Mandiri economist, said that if inflation is not controlled and affects people's purchasing power, it may force BI to raise rates sooner than projected.

Annual consumer prices in April rose 3.47% from a year earlier, the highest since 2017. The central bank aims to control inflation between 2%-4% this year.

Josua added that inflation could reach 4% if the government makes adjustment to some fuel prices and electricity tariffs.

Indonesia's palm oil export ban, imposed from April 28 to control domestic prices of cooking oil "could hold back the recovery if it remains in place for a long time," Capital Economics' Gareth Leather said.

Indonesia's central bank last month lowered its economic growth outlook for the year to 4.5%-5.3%, from 4.7%-5.5% previously, citing slower global growth and disruptions to trade. - Reuters





SplitText Morning commuters at a pedestrian crossing in the central business district of Jakarta, Indonesia, on Nov. 5, 2021. Indonesia's economy grew for the fourth straight quarter between January and March as Covid-19 restrictions continued to be relaxed, statistics bureau data showed on Monday.

Dimas Ardian | Bloomberg | Getty Images

An historic rise in commodity prices and relaxation of Covid-19 curbs helped Indonesia's economy grow for a fourth straight quarter between January and March, official data showed on Monday.

Southeast Asia's largest economy grew 5.01% in January-March from the same period last year, compared with 5.02% growth in October-December. A median forecast by 19 analysts polled by Reuters had expected 5.00% growth in the first quarter.

Growth in the January-March period was supported by recovery in consumption, investment and exports. Surging prices of global commodities such as coal, palm oil and nickel, also contributed to record high trade surpluses for Indonesia, a major supplier of these resources.

Covid-19 restrictions imposed earlier in the year, which have now been lifted, led to a strong pick-up in Indonesia's economic activities, Margo Yuwono, head of Indonesia's statistics bureau, told a news conference.

"Household consumption has improved, even for tertiary spending such as travels," he added.

But President Joko Widodo has warned of inflation risks stemming from rising global fuel and food prices and supply chain disruptions made worse by the war in Ukraine.

Analysts also cited geopolitical concerns as factors that could hamper growth.

"Several global risks that will affect the national economic recovery include geopolitical risks, China's economic slowdown and rising global inflation that has prompted tightening of global monetary policy," Josua Pardede, an economist at Bank Permata, said.

Indonesia's central bank last month lowered its economic growth outlook for the year to 4.5%-5.3%, from 4.7%-5.5% previously, citing slower global growth and disruptions to trade.

Bank Indonesia (BI), which has pledged to keep interest rates at record lows until it sees signs of pressure on core inflation, intends to review its monetary policy normalization plan in May to June, and assess any risks to the inflation outlook if the government changes energy prices and subsidies.

It had previously said interest rate levels would only be reviewed in the third quarter.

On a quarterly, non-seasonally adjusted basis, the economy contracted 0.96%, compared with 1.06% growth in October-December and forecasts of a 0.89% decline.

The Statistical Agency of Indonesia (Badan Pusat Statistik, BPS) released Indonesia’s Q1-2022 gross domestic product (GDP) data on 9 May 2022. Based on its calculation the Indonesian economy expanded 5.01 percent year-on-year (y/y), which is in fact better –albeit very modestly– than our projection that was set at 5.0 percent (y/y).





SplitText While most macroeconomic indicators indeed pointed at a positive environment for economic growth in Q1-2022, there did occur the threat of the Omicron wave that peaked in Indonesia in mid-February 2022 (with the peak at almost 65,000 positive test results per day). Fortunately, this wave did not translate to a significant number of people requiring medical treatment, hence there was no need for the government to scale up existing social and business restrictions significantly. And so, economic activity was not overly burdened in Q1-2022, which is reflected in the GDP data.

Obviously, considering the Indonesian economy contracted in Q1-2021, the low base effect is also still at play, hence managed to push Indonesia’s Q1-2022 rate to a level that is perhaps modestly misleading in the sense that the economy is not fully back to normal yet, despite the fact that the Indonesian economy typically posted growth rates of around 5 percent (y/y) in 2016-2019 (see table 1 below). For example, the tourism industry is still miles away from recovery, implying Indonesia misses out on billions of US dollars in foreign exchange earnings.

In short, what supported Indonesia’s Q1-2022 economic growth were particularly the following factors (these factors will be discussed in more detail below):

Indonesia’s export performance was very strong thanks to high commodity prices (despite a small hiccup in coal exports in January 2022 amid state intervention);

Household consumption continued to recover in Indonesia as the COVID-19 threat wanes (albeit not fully back to pre-COVID-19-crisis levels yet);

Investment continued to recover in Indonesia on expectations that there will no need for tighter social and business restrictions in the foreseeable future; and

The low base effect as weak economic growth (in fact: contraction) in the same quarter one year earlier facilitates a strong growth rate in Q1-2022.

Taking a Closer Look at the Data

When we take a look at current prices and constant prices (inflation-adjusted with BPS using 2010 as base year), it is clear that the Indonesian economy was bigger in Q1-2022 than it was in the corresponding quarters in previous years. Hence in terms of size, the economy of Indonesia has already recovered from the COVID-19 crisis (in fact, in terms of size, the Indonesian economy had already recovered last year).





SplitText Bali was among some of Indonesia's most famous tourist destinations that recorded a significant number of visitors. - AP

JAKARTA (Xinhua): Indonesia has recorded a boom in the number of visitors to tourist destinations after two years of shutdown, thanks to the long Eid holiday and waived restrictions, the country's Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy announced.

Minister of Tourism and Creative Economy Sandiaga Uno told a press briefing on Tuesday (may 10) that a significant number of people flocked to various tourist sites across the world's largest Muslim population during the Islamic Eid holiday, which ran from April 29 to May 8, with money turnover reaching up to 72 trillion Rupiahs (US$4.9bil).

"Almost all tourist destinations in the country were full of visitors. This could happen because the government allowed people to go mudik for Eid," Uno said.

Eid al-Fitr is the biggest Muslim celebration in Indonesia. The holiday marks the end of the Islamic fasting month of Ramadan. Going homewards, locally called mudik, is an annual tradition for Indonesian Muslims, where people go to their hometowns to reunite with their families.

This year, the Indonesian Transportation Ministry estimated that there were no fewer than 85 million people who went homewards and travelled on holiday as the government has waived social restrictions.

Uno mentioned that some of the country's most famous tourist destinations that recorded a significant number of visitors were Bali resort island, Ancol Dreamland Park in North Jakarta, and Taman Mini Indonesia Indah cultural park in East Jakarta.

In Bali alone, the money turnover reached 250 billion Rupiahs ($17.2 million) during the holiday, according to Uno.

Deputy Chairman of the Indonesian Hotel and Restaurants Association (PHRI) for Bali, I Gusti Agung Rai Suryawijaya, said that during the Eid holiday, the tourism sector on the island served more than 33,000 domestic tourists and 4,000 foreign tourists each day. During the pandemic, Bali could only see on average 8,000 tourists each day.

Hotel room occupancy also reached 80 per cent, higher than the 30 per cent occupancy rate when the government still imposed public activity restrictions.

"Accommodation owners are optimistic that the tourism sector can recover faster in 2022," Suryawijaya said.

Indonesia has seen a positive growth in its tourism sector since March, when the government started to lift a number of restrictions and open international arrivals, which then led to a strong pick-up in Indonesia's economic activities.

Throughout March, the country's Central Agency of Statistics (BPS) recorded 40,790 international arrivals, a drastic 121.02 per cent increase compared to the previous month.

The South-East Asia's largest economic powerhouse also announced Monday that its economy grew 5.01 per cent year-on-year during the first quarter of this year, compared with 5.02 per cent growth in the fourth quarter of 2021. The growth was mainly supported by the recovery in consumption, investment and exports.

Economy expert Bhima Yudhistira from the Center of Economic and Law Studies, an Indonesian think tank, said that the tourism sector would bring domino effects to other sectors, from transportation, clothing, food and beverages, to telecommunications.

He predicted that in the second quarter of this year, Indonesia's economy would grow around 4.5 per cent year on year due to the high mobility of the people during the Eid holiday.





SplitText Indonesia registered an economic growth of 5.01 percent in Q1, mainly supported by improved household consumption, investment and global commodities exports.

JAKARTA, May 10 (Xinhua) -- Despite turbulence in global economic prices, Indonesia recorded an economic growth of 5.01 percent year-on-year in the first quarter of this year, compared to 5.02 percent it recorded during the fourth quarter of 2021, the country's Central Agency of Statistics announced on Monday.

The growth was in line with the prediction made by Indonesia's Minister of Finance Sri Mulyani Indrawati that the country's economy would grow on average 5 percent year-on-year.

"The economic growth during the first three months of this year was contributed by the growth of people's activities as restrictions continue to be waived, and by the low-based effect in the first quarter of 2021," the agency head Margo Yuwono told a press conference.

He added that the growth was mainly supported by a recovery in household consumption, investment and exports in global commodities such as coal, palm oil and nickel.

"Household consumption has improved, and people spend more money on traveling," he said.
