KUALA LUMPUR: Malaysia is optimistic that the economic recovery will continue to be resilient in the third quarter of 2022 (Q3 2022), notwithstanding external risks and downward pressure after favourable performance was seen in Q1 2022, according to the Department of Statistics Malaysia (DoSM).

Chief statistician Datuk Seri Dr Mohd Uzir Mahidin said many countries recorded a better performance in Q1 2022, indicating that economic improvement is underway in spite of multiple ongoing global crises causing disruptions in the supply chain, inflationary pressure and pushing for tightening of monetary policies.

For instance, he said, the European Union, the United Kingdom (UK) and the United States (US) recorded expansion of gross domestic product (GDP) and a similar trend was observed in Asian countries like China, South Korea, the Philippines and Thailand.

"As for Malaysia, the GDP grew better-than-expected by five per cent in Q1 2022 after registering a 3.6 per cent growth in the previous quarter,” he said in a statement today.

Citing the Malaysian Economic Statistics Review (MESR) Volume 5/2022 released by DoSM today, Mohd Uzir said several key countries’ economic indicators registered a positive trajectory in Q1 2022.

"With regard to the external sector, the current account balance remained surplus at RM3.0 billion, mainly supported by the net exports of goods account.

"Investment performance also improved, with foreign direct investment recording a higher net inflow of RM24.4 billion, while direct investment abroad posted a lower net outflow of RM3.6 billion,” he said.

He added that trade continued with its robust performance whereby total trade posted a double-digit growth of 23.6 per cent amounting to RM624.9 billion in Q1 2022.

In terms of the performance in March 2022, Mohd Uzir said the industrial production index posted a growth of 5.1 per cent against March 2021, backed by the manufacturing index which rose 6.9 per cent year-on-year (y-o-y) driven by exports and domestic-oriented outputs.

On the prices segment, he said the consumer price index (CPI) for March 2022 rose by 2.2 per cent y-o-y, staying above Malaysia's average inflation rate of 1.9 per cent from 2011 to March 2022.

"The producer price index (PPI) for local production also posted a double-digit growth of 11.6 per cent compared to 9.7 per cent in February 2022,” he said, adding that the leading index grew 0.4 per cent month-on-month to 111.3 points, indicating improved and favourable performance in Malaysia’s economy.

Mohd Uzir said DoSM’s recent Business Tendency Statistics also highlighted that business sentiment remained positive for Q2 2022, while in the forthcoming six months, the business sentiment outlook is also optimistic. – Bernama





SplitText KUALA LUMPUR (May 17): The Malaysian economy is expected to return to above pre-Covid-19 pandemic levels with the 2022 gross domestic product (GDP) growth forecast up at 7% from 6.2% given stronger-than-expected growth in the first quarter (1Q22), said Standard Chartered Bank (StanChart).

The bank also maintained that overnight policy rate (OPR) hikes in 2022 will total 75 basis points, with two more hikes in July and September 2022 respectively, bringing the OPR up to 2.5% by end-2022. 

StanChart said the “growth recovery was broad-based”, which saw all components expanding quarter-on-quarter (q-o-q), with the exception of investment and trade in services remaining below pre-pandemic levels as of 1Q22.

"In terms of industries, 18 out of 21 sectors expanded q-o-q, and we estimate that 74% of the economy is above pre-Covid-19 levels," StanChart said in a research note on Tuesday (May 17).

The bank noted that the labour market had also continued to recover, with strong employment growth and tighter conditions translating into higher wage growth. 

It said the economic and labour market recovery “justifies” the move by Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) to begin the process of normalising monetary policy from emergency settings. 

"We expect the process of normalising monetary policy from emergency settings to continue. While inflationary pressure is not substantial, the current low policy rate is not seen as commensurate with the economic recovery," it said. 

StanChart noted that BNM may also want “to take advantage of the robust growth to build policy space” as the policy guidance suggests that more rate hikes are likely. 

However, StanChart lowered its 2023 GDP growth forecast to 4.2% from 4.5% previously due to higher base effects.  





SplitText KUALA LUMPUR (May 13): The Malaysian economy is expected to continue its recovery momentum this year, after the country's first-quarter 2022 (1Q 2022) performance saw a growth of 5%, supported by increases in domestic and external demand, as well as labour market recovery.

Finance Minister Tengku Datuk Seri Zafrul Tengku Abdul Aziz said growth in 1Q 2022 was attributed to the government's consistent policy support, particularly initiatives under an expansionary Budget 2022 which have been in full swing since the start of the year, as well as the spillover effects from Budget 2021 and previous stimulus and assistance packages.

During 1Q 2022, the monthly gross domestic product (GDP) grew consistently at a rate of 4.3% in January, 5.2% in February, and 5.4% in March.

Among the various economic indicators that have shown signs of improvement are the continued labour market recovery, with unemployment rate at 4.1%, 0.2 percentage points lower compared to the previous quarter.

“This was attributed to the implementation of wage subsidy programmes worth more than RM20 billion and successful job creation initiatives such as JanaKerja and JaminKerja.

"The unemployment rate is expected to fall further in the coming months as government assistance continues, and business prospects improve," he said in a statement on Friday.

Tengku Zafrul said, secondly, increased business optimism is in line with strong private consumption, as indicated by the Malaysian Institute of Economic Research's (MIER) Consumer Sentiment Index which rose to 108.9 points in 1Q 2022 (4Q 2021: 97.2 points), while the Department of Statistics Malaysia's (DoSM) Business Tendency Statistics showed 7.6% confidence indicator (4Q 2021: -0.3%).

"Overall, this was reflected in strong manufacturing sales which increased by 13.9% to RM144.6 billion in March 2022, as well as wholesale and retail trade sales which rose 9.8% to RM123.8 billion," said the Finance Minister.

Additionally, there was robust external trade and foreign direct investments (FDIs) with total trade rising 23.6% to RM624.9 billion, while net FDIs increased to RM24.4 billion (4Q 2021: RM18.4 billion).

Manufacturing, financial and insurance/takaful activities, and wholesale and retail trade attracted the most FDIs, primarily from Switzerland, the United States, Hong Kong, and Japan.

Meanwhile, on Malaysia's financial and capital markets, Tengku Zafrul said the availability of financing continued to improve, as evidenced by an increase in household loan growth.

Outstanding household loans increased by 4.8% (4Q 2021: 4.2%), which is in line with the 12.7% growth in loan disbursements (4Q 2021: 9.5%), outpacing the 3.3% increase in loan repayments (4Q 2021:-4.6%).

"Meanwhile, the FTSE Bursa Malaysia KLCI rose by 1.3% in 1Q 2022, with net purchases from local retail investors totalling RM501 million, and consistent net inflows from foreign investors amounting to RM6.5 billion.

"Bursa Malaysia led ASEAN exchanges in listing proceeds from five initial public offerings worth US$362 million (RM1.6 billion)," he said.

Moving forward, the transition to the endemic phase, as well as the reopening of international borders, will increase tourist arrivals and improve trade and business activities.

Furthermore, the RM10,000 special withdrawal from the Employees' Provident Fund (EPF) and Bantuan Keluarga Malaysia (BKM) payments are expected to boost private consumption and help the economy recover further.

"The expansionary 2022 Budget and the resumption of projects with high multiplier effects will help to sustain growth, which will be supported by implementation of development programmes under the 12th Malaysian Plan.

"Together with strong external demand from major trading partners, the economy is on track to meet the 5.3% to 6.3% GDP growth forecast in 2022," said Tengku Zafrul.

Nonetheless, he said the government is cautious of potential downside risks to growth posed by recent global events.

According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), inflation will rise by 5.7% in advanced economies and 8.7% in emerging market and developing economies.

“Malaysia’s inflation is expected to range between 2.2% and 3.2% (2021: 2.5%) this year, in line with the IMF's forecast of 3% per cent, the lowest amongst ASEAN countries.

"If global developments continue to affect investment and global trade, supply chains will be impacted further, potentially disrupting Malaysia’s economic recovery momentum, given that we are an open economy with total trade accounting for 120% of GDP,” he said.

Furthermore, the sharp rise in inflationary pressures, particularly in the US, has prompted several Central Banks to raise policy rates at a faster pace, potentially leading to tighter global financial conditions.

Commodity and food price increases, as well as labour shortages, may limit Malaysia’s growth potential, he noted.

As the government continues to monitor and manage various economic risks, Tengku Zafrul said its medium-term priority is to implement structural reforms that will boost the country’s economic potential, resilience and prospects, as well as make Malaysia a more attractive investment destination.

"Overall, this will promote more sustainable and inclusive economic growth for all," he added.





SplitText PETALING JAYA: The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is optimistic that Malaysia’s economy will expand by 5.75% in 2022, driven by pent-up domestic demand and continued strong external demand.

This is in line with the government’s growth projection of between 5.3% and 6.3% for 2022. The economy expanded by 3.1% last year.

In providing an assessment of Malaysia’s growth prospects, Bernama quoted the IMF as saying that Malaysia’s high vaccination rates and limited movement restrictions would also support economic expansion.

On the flipside, the Washington-based agency acknowledged that there were substantial downside risks, including from the Covid-19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine, a similar predicament faced by both developed and developing economies globally.

“Malaysia’s growth is projected to be solid in the medium term, although risks of long-term economic scarring are real,” the IMF’s executive board said in its conclusions following consultations with Malaysian officials in an assessment report released last April.

The IMF also welcomed Malaysia’s accommodative monetary policy stance, as inflation expectations are well anchored.

To this end, the IMF noted that Malaysia’s commitment to exchange rate flexibility, saying it will continue to serve the country well.

This was further reinforced just last week when Bank Negara reaffirmed its position that it will not peg the ringgit despite the apparent weakness of the currency.

This was because the banking sector was still well-capitalised and highly liquid, buttressed against a strong asset quality.

The IMF also said that Malaysia’s financial sector “remains resilient,” and that it was encouraged by its reforms that focused on inclusion, economic transformation, and a sustainable economy.

This was clearly reflective of Prime Minister Datuk Seri Ismail Sabri Yaakob’s Keluarga Malaysia concept which focuses on inclusion, togetherness and gratitude aimed at bringing the people together in helping the country recover from the debilitating Covid-19.

The IMF, which has 190 member countries, also lauded the implementation of the 12th Malaysia Plan as it focused on boosting labour productivity, enhancing the digital and green economies, and strengthening fiscal governance.

“This would help minimise pandemic-related economic scarring while promoting inclusive growth and job creation,” the IMF said.

It also took note of the assessment by IMF staff that Malaysia’s external position was moderately stronger than warranted by economic fundamentals and desirable policies.

The IMF also called for policies to strengthen social safety nets to support an inclusive recovery and facilitate external rebalancing, which Malaysia was already doing via its multi-billion ringgit Covid-related budgeting.

In reviewing 2021, the IMF said the swift, substantial, and multi-pronged pandemic policy response supported the economy.

Total Covid-related budget spending amounted to RM39bil, which is about 2.5% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2021, more than double the initially budgeted RM17bil, and above the RM38bil spent in 2020.

As a result, the federal government’s deficit reached about 6.5% of GDP in 2021, higher than about 5.5% deficit foreseen in Budget 2021.

The federal government’s debt is estimated at 63% of GDP, below the domestic debt ceiling of 65%, it said.





SplitText BENGALURU (May 11): Malaysia's economic growth likely gathered pace in the last quarter, driven by stronger demand following a relaxation of Covid-19 measures, but a prolonged slowdown in China could have significant knock-on effects, a Reuters poll found.

Southeast Asia's third-largest economy is predicted to have expanded 4% in the January-March quarter compared to the same three-month period a year earlier, according to the median forecast of 18 economists, faster than the 3.6% increase in the preceding quarter.

Forecasts for annual gross domestic product growth, due to be released on Friday (May 13), range from 2% to 5.7%.

"Malaysia's growth improvement in 1Q22 (the first quarter of 2022) was likely underpinned by stronger domestic demand driven by private consumption and services activities," said Chua Han Teng, an economist at DBS.

"Relaxed virus containment measures helped by high vaccination [rates] despite the Omicron wave translated into an uptick in services activity."

That, along with an improved export-led acceleration in manufacturing in March, suggests foreign trade remains a growth engine for a country rich in natural resources such as oil, natural gas, timber, palm oil and cocoa.

Demand for Malaysian palm oil is set to rise after top producer Indonesia temporarily banned shipments last month in a bid to tame soaring domestic cooking oil prices.

Malaysia's economic performance has improved sharply on stronger commodity prices and domestic demand and still-buoyant exports are expected to help drive growth this year and next.

Growth is forecast to average 6.1% and 5% this year and in 2023 respectively, according to a separate Reuters poll published last month.

While the domestic economy is expected to expand as activities recover from the disruption caused by Covid-19, a significant slowdown in China poses a greater risk to the world's second-largest palm oil exporter.

China is Malaysia's biggest trade and investment partner.

"As the engine of growth for the APAC (Asia-Pacific) region, China's slowing growth poses risks to the rest of the region. In particular, the export and import of high-value intermediate goods with China will affect Malaysia's key manufacturing sector," wrote Denise Cheok, an economist at Moody's Analytics.

"While Malaysia has limited direct trade exposure to Russia and Ukraine, the risk of inventories running low rises as the conflict drags on."