BANGKOK, June 1 (Reuters): Thailand's economic activity in May showed gradual improvement as concerns about the pandemic receded and restrictions eased, the central bank has announced.

Issues to be monitored, however, include an increase in costs and prices, shortages of production parts and a recovery in the vital tourism sector, the Bank of Thailand (BOT) said.

The Southeast Asian country has relaxed most of its restrictions as Covid-19 infections decline and will lift curbs on nightlife from June to try to revive tourism.

Getting tourists back is an important factor that would drive the economy, senior director Chayawadee Chai-Anant told a news conference.

In March, the BOT forecast 2022 economic growth of 3.2% with 5.6 million foreign arrivals. It will review those projections at its next monetary policy meeting on June 8.

In 2019, there were nearly 40 million foreign visitors.

A weak baht is moving in line with regional currencies and is likely to remain volatile due to global uncertainty, Chayawadee said.

In April, the economy improved from the previous month with increased private consumption and investment, the BOT said.

Thailand's current account deficit of US$3.4 billion in April was the biggest in nine years due to a smaller trade surplus and higher remittance of profits and dividends by foreign businesses.

Exports rose 6.6% in April from a year earlier, with imports up 19.1% year-on-year and a trade surplus of $1.1 billion for the month. - Reuters





SplitText Thailand's economy likely grew modestly in Q1, stung by high inflation

An empty hotel and beach which have opened for visitors is seen in Karon, Phuket Island, Thailand March 31, 2021.

Thailand's GDP seen at 2.1% y/y in Q1 vs 1.9% in Q4

Q1 GDP seen at 0.9% q/q sa vs 1.8% in Q4

Q1 GDP data due on Tuesday, May 17 at 0130 GMT

BENGALURU, May 13 (Reuters) - Thailand's economy likely grew modestly in the first quarter, thanks to robust exports and an easing of COVID-19 restrictions and despite low tourist arrivals and high inflation dampening consumer spending, a Reuters poll found.

Southeast Asia's second-largest economy is estimated to have expanded 2.1% in the January-March period compared with the same period a year earlier, according to a May 6-13 poll of 15 economists. It showed annual growth of 1.9% in the previous quarter.

"We expect Thailand GDP to recover moderately in 1Q22, given a rebound in economic activities after COVID restrictions eased," said Lalita Thienprasiddhi, senior researcher at Kasikorn Research Center.

Register now for FREE unlimited access to Reuters.com

"Tourism recovery and strong exports will be the main driving factors for the Thai economy in 1Q22," she said.

First-quarter gross domestic product (GDP) was estimated to have been 0.9% higher than in the previous quarter, according to a smaller sample of forecasts. That would be half of the quarterly growth of 1.8% in the fourth quarter of 2021.

Estimates of the latest quarterly change ranged from a 0.8% contraction to 1.7% growth, highlighting the uncertainties surrounding the recovery of the economy from the pandemic.

The data is due to be released at 0130 GMT on May 17.

"A deceleration of GDP growth is expected due to impacts from the Russia-Ukraine conflict, a decline in consumer confidence with soaring inflation and a decline in household non-energy spending" said Phacharaphot Nuntramas, chief economist at Krung Thai Bank.

Inflation has remained above the Bank of Thailand's upper limit of 3% so far this year and is expected to remain there until the end of the year, according to a separate Reuters poll.

The tourism-reliant economy is on track to receive just 6.1 million foreign visitors this year, falling short of an earlier projection of 7 million because of China's travel restrictions and curtailment of Russian visits due to the war in Ukraine. read more

In 2019, before the coronavirus pandemic, Thailand received nearly 40 million visitors.

GDP for all of 2022 is expected to be 3.5% higher than a year earlier, according to another Reuters poll, in line with recently trimmed government projections and the IMF.





SplitText New economic crisis may hit Thailand, warns former minister

Kobsak said the multiple risks included rising inflation, the armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine, and the property crisis in China and Thailand will inevitably feel the effects of these crises.

Kobsak Pootrakool, a former Minister Attached to the Prime Minister’s Office, has suggested that the global economic situation will likely continue to face multiple risks.

He said these included rising inflation, the armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine, and the property crisis in China

The former minister also said a global economic slump can be expected after China lowered its GDP growth forecast from 8% to 6%. The world’s second largest economy recently imposed pandemic lockdowns on several of its major cities under the nation’s “Zero COVID” policy, which has impacted the production sector.

China’s central bank also announced an interest rate reduction for 5-year loans to 4.45%, the biggest downgrade since 2019.

Kobsak said Thailand will inevitably feel the effects of these crises, as the kingdom relies heavily on exports to China.

He added that Thailand cannot count on Chinese tourists to revive the local tourism scene, as he expects China would need more time to focus on addressing its internal problems. (NNT)





SplitText Krabi, Thailand – At Railay Beach, an Instagrammers’ favourite known for its wide, warm sands bookended by limestone cliffs, 23-year-old Londoner Becca sips coffee and savours the return of Thai backpacking following a recent easing of entry requirements.

“We saved our money, quit work and travelled here,” she told Al Jazeera of her months-long trip with friends, which was impossible during the last two years lost to the pandemic.

Thailand was one of the first places in the world to reopen to tourists late last year, but under a confusing web of rules – including seven-day quarantine – travellers complained the small print failed to match the big announcements.

Meanwhile, horror stories of people testing positive on arrival and being shunted into 14-day quarantine – paid for from their own pocket – bounced around travel blogs and Twitter.

On May 1, Thailand dropped its “Test & Go” quarantine procedure, allowing vaccinated visitors to enter freely, while an onerous pre-departure registration scheme known as the “Thailand Pass” is likely to also be abandoned within weeks.

Authorities hope the result will be between 5 and 15 million overseas visitors by year-end, as the Southeast Asian country prepares to declare the coronavirus endemic and throws open the door to a travel-starved world.

On Railay beach, bars and restaurants already hum with backpackers, many knocking back beers to a loud techno soundtrack as the sun dips behind the ocean.

As far as Becca is concerned, the island-hopping route across Koh Phangan, Koh Samui, Phi Phi and Koh Tao is firmly back in business.

“It’s so cheap here, compared with where we’re from,” she said. “It’s such a treat to have a meal for two pounds.”

A 10-minute walk to the more rugged east side of the coast, tour operator Naren Fangkwa is less enthusiastic as he laments the continued absence of wealthier tourists to one of Thailand’s top destinations.

Naren believes many high-end visitors have been frightened off by the kingdom’s constantly changing entry rules.

“Since borders opened, visitors are mainly young people like uni students and backpackers who don’t really buy tour packages,” he said.

Many restaurants on Naren’s side of Railay get by on handfuls of customers, while several others remain shut, victims of a pandemic that has smashed one of the country’s most crucial industries.

Despite the banner headlines about reopening, tourism is still far below pre-pandemic levels, when it attracted nearly 40 million people and generated more than $60bn of revenue, accounting for up to a fifth of the kingdom’s gross domestic product.

Last month, forward bookings for 2022 showed Thailand had reached 25 percent of normal levels, compared with 72 per cent and 65 percent each for Singapore and the Philippines, respectively.

Nevertheless, the kingdom expects those who do visit between now and year-end – the majority from Europe, the United States, the Middle East and India – to spend at least 630 billion baht ($18bn) in the country, providing a much-needed boost to incomes as inflation chews into purchasing power.

Halal tours

Krabi, whose population is 40 percent Muslim, is particularly well-placed to pull in an expected surge in Middle Eastern visitors, with “halal tours” offering a mix of sightseeing, religious visits and food.

“We’re planning to tap the Middle Eastern market this year, especially Saudi Arabia,” Sasithorn Kittidhrakul, president of Krabi Tourism Association, told Al Jazeera.

“It’s a high-end market for us and Krabi has what it takes to cater to the health and wellness conscious tourists.”

Sasithorn said bookings at the province’s hotels are running at 30 percent for the next high season of October to March.

So far, bold projections of one million visitors a month are yet to be felt across the grassroots economy of Krabi, where most families count several members employed in tourism.

Driver Sorapong Kuasuk said high-spending tour groups are yet to reappear and blames months of mixed messaging from the government for deterring bookings.

“Tourists are going to go to other countries that have clearer COVID measures,” he said, condemning Thailand’s months-long debate over ending quarantine on entry.

“Everyone knows that if the Thai authorities announce one thing in the morning they will change it by the evening. I think it’ll be a while before tourists feel more confident to return.”

Bigger economic forces also threaten the outlook for Thailand’s tourism reboot.

Surging living costs are eating into the disposable incomes of the world’s middle class.

Earlier this month, analysts at J P Morgan issued a pessimistic outlook for Thailand’s economic recovery, due in part to the lack of a timetable for the return of Chinese tourists under Beijing’s draconian “dynamic zero COVID” policies.

From Krabi to Phuket and Pattaya, Thai resorts do not expect a return to the boom times until Chinese visitors, who made up more than one-quarter of arrivals before the pandemic, come back.

For the tour operators of Railay, the next few months are about survival.

“We barely make 5 percent back of what we used to before COVID,” Atittaya Kajay, who sells boat trips to nearby islands, told Al Jazeera.

“People spend less now, they want bargains when before they were all higher end, people with money”.





SplitText Thailand's economy grew 2.2 per cent in the first quarter as exports and tourism rebounded after the relaxation of pandemic restrictions, the country’s main economic agency said on May 17.

During the pandemic, Southeast Asia’s second-largest economy suffered its worst economic performance since the 1997 Asian financial crisis, with visitor numbers crashing from roughly 40 million annually.

But this month the tourism-dependent kingdom dropped almost all restrictions for fully vaccinated visitors, including the need for Covid-19 tests to travel.

“The export sector is good … the tourism industry is getting better due to the relaxation of entry requirements for tourists,” National Economic and Social Development Council secretary-general Danucha Pichayanan said.

The agency said the economy grew by 2.2 per cent in January to March compared with the same period last year, and by 1.1 per cent compared with the previous quarter.

The figures are a stark turnaround from the depths of the pandemic, which saw the economy contract by 6.1 per cent in 2020.

The agency said global market volatility from the Ukraine conflict, and a slowdown in China’s economy thanks to virus lockdowns across various cities, were affecting the pace of the kingdom’s economic recovery.

Ukraine is a key exporter of fertiliser and the conflict has reduced supply in Thailand.

The Thai government has sought to ease the shortage by sourcing fertiliser from Saudi Arabia.

The agency also raised its inflation forecasts this year to between 4.2-5.2 per cent, up from the earlier range of 1.5-2.5 per cent.

Danucha attributed the inflation increase to rising energy prices.

The country has a weekly average of more than 6,500 daily new coronavirus infections, although testing is limited.
